what's it like when one of your friends
on death row is led away to be executed
well you spend you know years years and
months and months and hours of every day
with a person you talk every day hey
what are you doing and you know let's
eat something let's make something eat
and you know and he eventually comes by
one day and like I got to go man
and you know when he leaves and turns
his back and walks down them steps he
ain't coming back
kill me about an hour's drive south of
Chicago in the state of Indiana is one
of America's oldest and most notorious
maximum-security prison
the majority of the 1900 inmates here
are serving long sentences for
unspeakable crimes and when I came at
you I wasn't just gonna stick you an
inch I was gonna run something all the
way through
[Music]
twelve are due to be executed on the
orders of the state for two weeks I was
given privileged access to this dark and
forbidding world I do deserve to be
executed bottom line I'm gonna
candy-coat it I deserve to be executed
welcome to Indiana State Prison my
introduction to the prison was dramatic
the man who runs it superintendent bill
Wilson agreed to take me to death row so
this is actually the entrance this is
the actual entrance then and it's two
floors we only have 12 men on on the row
right now
you have to sign yourself in mm-hmm the
superintendent comes to death row every
week to check on how the inmates are
coping superintendent these the pictures
of people on death row correct these are
the twelve gentlemen that are on death
row it shows their cell locations so
that staff never have to question where
they're at no staff members are allowed
on the unit when the offenders are out
so the offenders actually will secure
themselves in the cells and then their
cell doors will be closed or opened as
they need to come in or out
do you like any of these people like
they're all they're all different in
many ways and I am respectful of who
they are what they are what I call them
my friends no but there are some
characters here that have some
personality characteristics that you
would say are likable he knows them old
by name and they know him McManus it
always amazed me I'll clean that cellars
keep it up to I know that trouble yeah
all right Wilkes how's your eyes you've
been over to medical at all yeah okay
all right how are you hey man
all right you how you doing hi it's
tension high not for me okay
all right Richie all right this mr.
Ritchie's life I believe it's from
England which part of England is she
from uh-huh in hog food chef yes years
ago in pound and we hit it off instantly
and she came over visited couldn't get
enough marry me
how often do you get a chance to see her
do you mind do you mind doing this no no
no not at all yes it is very very
unconventional though because the
endgame in this relationship is one that
you know and she knows well yeah kind of
because a lot of guys can get off death
row
a lot of us are getting off different
but cases like mine and like another
gentleman back here you know but we
didn't kill no luminair kids we were
charged with shooting a cop a police
officer they just don't like guys like
us no matter if you got good issues in
your case or not legal issues to let you
all to let you off that road it doesn't
matter you know I mean she knows that
then she married you I found something
now see I was a stupid kid at 19 and 20
I made very poor decisions I would make
decisions I would do things without
without thinking about them and I didn't
give a damn about the consequence at all
that kid to me now 32 years old
that kids gone
I'm not saying I'm rehabilitated you
know you're not saying that no but I
like that because I'll be bullshit I'm
not gonna sit here and lie to you I'm
the kind of guy that does need to be in
prison why are you the kind of guy who
makes it in prison because only kind of
guy if I get fired from a job and I
can't find a job I'll do it the legal
way try to get a job and I can't find a
job and I can't pay my bills
I'll go get a gun and I'll pay my bills
and I wouldn't think no nothing about it
won't bother me at all you've described
the person you are but how do you see
your life looking down the line where
does it where does it go where does it
end up
either in a box or doing a life sentence
on in population
that's my choice director young life
sentence or being in a box and I gotta
watch my wife grow old do these bones
out in the general population convicts
are allowed yard time two hours
recreation every day save for taking
showers and meals this is their only
opportunity to mix and to make Anna have
you been here a long time 27 years how
many 27 years 27 years
[Music]
I was heading to the administrative
segregation unit with lieutenant
Gillespie the men here are among the
prison's most dangerous
[Music]
this is sergeant Fagan this is unit
many of the offender's here are gang
members
drug dealers sexual predators everything
they do is monitored and carefully
control
could you tell me what this list of
names is all about this every cell house
in the nana state prison has one of
these the idea behind this is to make
sure we know where everyone's at what
they're doing who they are why they're
here
etc for example if someone would
accidentally take out 508 and 509
together and let's say they you know 508
owes 509 money so 509 is mad about it
and they get put in the shower together
to the doors locked and he has he has a
weapon on him five away could lose his
life look at that you know just because
someone made that mistake so that's why
it's important to really understand this
for do you feel that you must be
constantly vigilant these guys had
nothing but time okay we're going home
so we're thinking about going to dinner
with the wife going to dinner with the
mom whatever you know these things but
time they're sitting here you know and
these guys they're smart they don't
forget so let's say you made a mad two
weeks ago you forgot all about it they
don't so let's say you're sitting here
minding your business doing something
come up behind you and assault you yeah
you got it you got to be awake you got
to be on your toes
the offenders in this unit are locked
down for 23 hours a day and when they're
allowed out for their 60-minute break
they're kept apart in individual steel
cages one of the men is 38 year old
Ronald lsanty by any measure and in any
prison community his is an exceptional
stone
[Applause]
whether whether you come here Indiana
State Prison
all I came in 1989 at the age of 15
years old I was actually convicted of
the crime that I'm here for the age of
13 years old so and what was the crime
double homicide so I committed a double
homicide at the age of 13 years old at
the age of 15 my case hit Marin its
course through the port and I was
sitting here to this prison in 1989
double homicide at the age of 13 13
years that's very very young it's tragic
to say the least and it is very young
absolutely it's uh it's unheard of you
know Wow it's unspeakable to say the
least
even reflecting upon it almost 25 years
later in all this had to be 25 years
since that crime took place it's uh it's
still very vivid it's still very
poignant and still resonates and it
still has the same amount of tragic
elements involved in it down as it did
then and it will always be with me for
the rest of my life always says like all
the trials around my neck no matter what
I like what I where I go or what I do
for the rest of my life it'll always be
with me what were the circumstances
which led up to the incident which led
you in prison at the age of 15 me and a
friend had basically a plan to get money
to go to a fair and to do so we're gonna
cut grass we went to a home basically
and they said anyone wants a grass cut
and rather than continue on the vein and
go to the next home we decided to push
into the hole essentially and it ended
in a double homicide it's that simple
and our complicity in that crime over
sentence to 170 years one seven oh
you've got a sentence of a hundred and
seventy years however you cut that you
are not going to get out of here I'm
eligible for parole when I turn 100
years old
have you ever thought about all the
things that you have missed at other 15
year-olds go through is part of their
normal lives absolutely I've never been
to the prom I've never driven a car I've
never had a driver's license returns
I've never been on an airplane I've
never traveled abroad should I continue
my life has been living in this prison
and it seems as though I've been in this
prison so long I've never been free 25
years in prison you know it's a long
time especially when you're coming at
the age of 15 yeah really
a real thank you so much for talking to
me thank you for taking the time
I appreciate
[Music]
my first meeting with Sanford was a
shock but there were more disturbing
cases at Indiana's state prison
[Music]
one of the oddities of the American
prison system is that an inmate can
spend 20 years on death row exhausting
the appeals process before he's executed
in all that time convicts are confined
to this cellblock and have little
contact with the rest of the prison
Paul McManus killed his wife and two
young daughters it's not bad it's the
first thing I noticed about yourself it
is terribly clean very different from
any of the others why is that I feel if
I don't use it in a month and if I don't
need it yeah but it's it's it's more
than that isn't it it's it's
particularly claimed well me personally
I don't read or write so I have a lot of
time on my hands so so I clean because I
don't write letters I don't read books
there's only so much on TV you can watch
before the show repeats so it gives me a
lot of time so I just take pride in
clean myself what's your life before you
came to prison very similar where you
were a very tidy person then not so much
my work less I was always busy so I like
to stay busy it keeps my mind it works
both ways I guess you know our keep busy
in here but I'm pretty well done all I
can do in here I might have to move to a
different cell and do the same thing but
I've been here over a decade so I'm just
now getting it where I like it does
being on death row take a physical
emotional toll on you oh it's definitely
up and down definitely yeah
now I did weigh 250 pounds almost almost
two years ago and now I weigh 166 now I
have a pictures of them if you would
like to see them I got it right here in
my back
yes
and you see the difference so this is
tell me this is all you so you lost a
lot of weight right
no it's depression a little bit you know
and it's also just it's like I said it's
a roller coaster is up and down
[Music]
McManus sees more of Indiana State
Prison than the other men on death row
he's a diabetic and is allowed a daily
visit to the prison hospital the
authorities must treat him although they
will in all probability put him to death
one day
[Music]
well here we are out of death row and
into the sunlight is this the only
chance you get to mix with the rest of
the general prison population yes we
don't have a lot of contact with them so
it is nice to be able to come out and
see people that you've maybe been in
locked up with that are not on a roll no
more and every once in a while you can
you know have a little bit of contact
with that person just for a brief second
where you want any kind of medication
like incident before you came no prison
absolutely none zip now you know I take
quite a few pills and the insulin shots
it all comes down to the food and also
how you you know you have your ups and
downs where you gain weight and then
stuff like that so I mean that does play
a factor
Oh
what's what's nice about there is a nice
thing about being at that beck is that
you do get to get out and come over to
the hospital daily and then to be around
regular people it's nice yeah
alright alright bye see you later
the rest of the prison is distinctly
different from the oppressive view of
death breath
lunch time in cellblock C prisoners have
a chance to spend time in the open air
they can also earn privileges some have
jobs and can request a haircut twice a
month
[Music]
all the Bombers are conflicts Rick
Parrish is serving three life sentences
plus 10 years I must say walking into
this place is one of the most
extraordinary experiences I've had for a
long time you wouldn't have thought that
this was a barbershop or in a
maximum-security prison well we we work
hard to keep it unique in here because
we like the atmosphere we like being
able to come in here and relax it's
neutral territory for gangs for officers
I mean if you come to the barbershop and
you're a gang member would you start
trouble with a guy that's standing here
with pair of shears in his hand like
this I know I wouldn't I suspect not to
that's why there's no trouble in here
they still though this feeling of
unreality about people with instruments
like these in a maximum-security prison
I've been here 37 years we've never had
an incident in a barbershop we've never
had inch in it with the shears never had
a problem you've been here since the 70s
that's a long time
January 75 long time yeah
well you know if you do today at a time
like most of us do you do time a day at
a time sometimes an hour at a time
sometimes a minute at a time whatever it
takes to get through then you look up
one day and 37 years went by they go
young man thank you
Rick what are we looking at here little
history of the penitentiary in the
barber shop the shop was remodeled in
August of 76 and that's the first
picture taken in there is that you that
yes it is also this is your wall yeah
I'm I'm all over the wall because it is
my wall and this and you'll be a pumping
iron here yeah that was probably 20
years ago when I was eating in here you
didn't move and pump an art at the same
time so this is a catalogue of your life
in pictures
yeah oh you can see you see the progress
from what I look like in 76 up here to
where I'm at right now here that's the
newest picture what emotions do they
invoke wishing I was out there doing it
right
wishing I could start all over again at
29 30 years of age and not make the
mistakes I made but you get past after
37 years you better be past all that you
know have your head screwed on you know
make the best what you have but the
pictures are constant reminders yeah
what was you know that's like you know
all of us had got here were violent
criminals forget here Bozzio violent
crime Rick I'm in here for kidnap
robbery I pulled a robbery and the car I
had wouldn't start so I commandeer the
vehicle no street people in it all the
pictures here you have it on mounted on
cardboard yeah it's on cardboard so if I
ever get out I can take it with me
that's what that's what it's for
I fold it up and take it with me as a
reminder you don't want to go back
[Music]
I went back to the administrative
segregation unit to see Ronald L Sanford
again his story haunted me a killer when
he barely entered his teens
RL hi how you doing good how do you get
accustomed to life in this environment
it takes some getting used to
it's tough I was a young man on the
range of very young man maybe 19 20
years old he's exhibiting psychosis and
they took me to see the psychic the
psychologist because he's having trouble
adapting this is an abnormal environment
for a human being certainly you know
these are essentially cages and I think
that we stay in 24 hour 23 hours a day
come out for an hour a day it's it's
taxing
may I have a look in your cell about
have a have a look at some of the bird
just like to have a look yes you could
you could take whatever down you want to
take down and war against the weak what
was that about eugenics eugenics yes sir
America's attempt to make a master race
essentially and this one is the tree of
life what that's this as Kabbalah
actually it was more metaphysics
essentially those those deep questions
about man where it comes from where
we're going and who we are essentially
yes I see that you have in addition to
your books you have some of your own
writing on the walls yes strength
well-being and health yes just something
I try to focus on if there's anything I
want to save my mind on as I always say
something progressive so being strong
and having
a good disposition and being in good
health for certain certain things are
definitely more to focus on and you have
written here no no man is your enemy no
man is your friend every man is your
teacher yes sir
I'm also standing here and I think these
are the parameters of your of your exist
existence absolutely these four walls
it's a pretty isolating place it really
is if you see this search its isolated
only to the extent that you you think it
is you know I mean those books allow for
a great escape and for to be able to
leave the confines of the world so but
I'm only in here for a few minutes and I
I feel it as such I feel it I feel it I
feel everybody in this building feels
the the the confinement that were
suffering here you know you don't even
put an animal in a cage with too great
of a mess at the time he goes crazy you
know how much more so humans
[Music]
this is what Sanford looked like when he
came here at the tender age of 15 his
murder of two elderly women in 1987
netted him the meager sum of $5
on that vile act he must reflect for the
rest of his life
[Music]
[Applause]
prison life moves to the relentless and
monotonous beat of an unchanging routine
[Music]
some inmates get the chance to relieve
the tedium by work
at the end of his shift Rick perished
the barbel returns to what's called an
honor sir
to which only the most trusted prisoners
are assigned to man so two males
Nakul opens the door is that controlled
by the computer company officers
computer controls all the doors controls
our water back coming to yourself shirt
please thank you and this is your
cellmate Mike Mike I'm Trevor McDonald
how long have you been sharing a cell
with redcap Oh about two and a half
years right that's correct
so which is your side oh this is your
son it strikes me too that there has to
be a rather clear division of what's
yours and what's Mike's that's that's
Mike's cabinet over there yeah and he
has all his commissary and stuff in
there this is my cabinet here and I have
my commissary and things in here but in
general for sharing of space you have to
try to give the other person their
privacy if he's doing something and he's
up walking around I tried to stay over
there and he does the same for me
you know just you know try to take turns
doing things cuz it is close quarters so
this is an improvement from any other
part of the prison you've been you've
been in regular cell house you see how
they live over there you've heard the
noise here are quiet it is the stage
quiet like this most times and I'm sure
you have to put up with another human
being but it's worth it it's worth the
sacrifice Rick's on a cell does not
insulate him from one stark reality
death row is within shouting distance in
the same row
what does it like to live so close to
death row well I just block it out I
don't I don't pay attention to it I'm a
barber and I won't even go and cut hair
because I don't want to get to know any
of you know you lose enough friends
through attrition in here it is about
them being on death row I don't even
wanna get familiar with why don't you
want to get familiar with it because you
get friendly with them you get to know
them they get executed you know as
you've lost another friend does the mood
change perceptibly just before an
execution in the days before an
execution yeah it gets even quieter you
know everybody knows last one I think
was Wiggles he stopped here hollered
down through there I'll see you fellas
he said that ya know everybody usually
awake we're used to midnight we used to
beat on the bars and how many times has
that happened since you've been here how
many institutions have there been since
you've been there I've never kept trying
like I said I try not to dwell on us
to attract other would there be too many
as far as I'm concerned
Rick Parrish says he's never kept track
of the number of executions someone on
death row obviously has
[Music]
every one of the 12 men on death row
will one day be told the date and time
of his execution
[Music]
that common fate inspires unusual
friendships
[Music]
John Stevenson was a member of an
organized criminal gang he assassinated
three people Benjamin Ricci who had met
before killed a police officer
hi how you doing yeah good to see you
yeah good to see you good you too in
adjoining cells how long have you been
friends about eleven years since I got
her on death row he was already here
when I got here how did this friendship
come about what what what drew you to
each other as friends well just we got
the same interests I mean we play our
music loud we play video games we work
out play basketball eat together if shit
goes down we woke them up fuck his ass
together you know that's how our
friendship came about step me do you
have a lot in common
yeah well I thought we did you're not
sure anymore
no no I'm just I'm just kidding I don't
want you two friends to argue about I
mean if anything we always argued but
we've never come to blows over no never
never have you and then half hour later
Hey what we eating tonight you know it's
over
yeah don't matter don't mean nothing I'm
always writing in so he's the voice of
reason you're the voice of anga from
what you absolutely yeah
is that right he keeps a leash on me
yeah like I'd rather lash out at
something like when I first met boy and
he hated me because I was just a
straight-up asshole I be in your face
fuck you you know come on in the shower
and let's fight and I calmed way down
since then yeah the most important I
couldn't stand my ass and I got allowed
around older cats and they calmed me
down from your point of view what's this
friendship based on we heard from Richie
what teeth he thought it trusted trust
in each other
basically that's you know trust like if
shit goes down I got his back he's got
mine so that's why they moved us because
he got into it would a dude up here in
here and uh almost killed him the police
had to come in and stop it
and after they broke it up and
everything administration got wind that
I was gonna try to kill the dude because
he cut my buddy wood at night and so
they moved me and my buddy text her to
the back and moved dude up in the front
by herself
so nobody can get to the dude within the
first two weeks of being on death row I
watched a man get murdered in front of
me get stabbed at 42 times dispatched
instantly and that was my wake up to
death row like you come here you want to
be a bully you want to take shit from
people this what's gonna happen to you
dude was just butchered although you
witnessed something so horrendous you
still sound pretty angry but see here's
the thing if you show any sign of
weakness in here
the Sharks will circle I won't be a
victim
I'll be one of the Sharks
thank the Sharks are gonna circle
regardless
[Music]
the average sentence at Indiana State
Prison is 52 years in Britain that might
seem like two life sentences but it's
infinitely preferable to having an
execution order hanging over your head
hello
[Music]
lieutenant Bowen has taken me to a block
to meet one prisoner who is escaped the
death penalty
[Music]
it's embarrassing how you doing Trevor
this is a offender Harrison I've known
offender Harris were probably around six
years I knew him here and also he was on
death row before how was it that you
managed to move from death row which is
not a particularly pleasant environment
to this which is comparatively the
cooler President ordered me a new trial
and they gave me years you still a the
death penalty
how did you get that new trial judge
that was in my trial was biased so they
ordered a new trial and instead of
taking the whole thing I just went ahead
and took the deal which was a hundred
and fifty years 150 years long time and
that's a very very long time indeed in
other words I'll die in here no way I
can make out no way I'm 62 now now Nate
is 66 so there's just no way in the
world I can I can make it out there are
people who might think that there's not
a lot of difference between being on
death row and having been given 150
years at the age of 62 it was like you
said there's still hope there there's no
hope on death row once they put you to
death that's it there's no more
wondering what's gonna happen there's no
more trying to work your way out of it
there's no more there's nothing still in
a way a kind of death sentence there's a
death sentence but you've got a lot more
freedom out here and you might as well
take the freedom and live your life out
here and having a job and being able to
work and go to chow hall and go to the
chapel and do that and a sit-up and just
wait to die how long were you on death
row 18 and a half years what was it like
to spend so long knowing that you faced
execution
very very hard very long it's hard to do
it up on x-ray sitting there waiting for
your last your last meal the last day
not knowing when it's gonna come why
were you on death row they said I killed
three people
you would probably have been executed
executed yes
how did they've been sent for that yes I
had about two months that was a pretty
close run thing what was that moment
like for you when you heard that you had
avoided execution it was a it was a
great moment great even though I still
got a lot of time to do like you said
where there's life there's hope
[Music]
as he said James Harrison will not leave
this prison alive but he knows he'll
never be strapped to a gurney and given
a lethal injection just after midnight
like most of the inmates Harrison now
enjoys the strange freedom of not
knowing the date and time of his death
[Music]
before leaving the prison at the end of
my first week I asked to see Benjamin
Ritchie again but this time face to face
in the year 2000 he shot and killed a
policeman at the time Ritchie was on
parole for Bert
[Music]
with less of the bravado he showed in
the company of his friend I wanted to
hear his view of his life and his crime
talk me through the incident which led
you to be here
well my crime is shooting a police
officer he killed me and it started off
you know pretty harmless as a fifth
crime me and my friends our ride around
and carjacked people and take their rims
from their cars from them and my buddy's
car was already full so I decided let's
get a van or a truck and we fill it up
with some rims and take it back and then
go sell everything I got in a high-speed
chase and wrecked into a house and
jumped out and took off running I was
trying to get away you know but the cop
was young and he was on my ass and I
thought maybe if I you know take my gun
out and fired a couple times it's
scaring because you know he's a beach
girl police officer it's kind of a good
neighborhood like how many times has he
been shot at you know you know if that
bullet would have hit just less than
half of an inch lower he'd be alive
today and I'd probably have a long
lengthy prison sentence but I wouldn't
be on death row man
how were you apprehended how are you
caught well I actually got away I made
it back actually a few blocks away to
some family's house and a girl I was
saying and got away and I didn't know I
killed him until I got back to the house
and seen it on the news and I just
destroyed me I knew I hit him in the
back yard but I didn't know I he was he
was dead right I fell asleep the next
thing I know I wake up in here my buddy
says they're outside I wake up and it
was like in the movies you see a whole
bunch of red dots from their guns going
and out the windows and I was like yeah
it's bad man I told him go ahead and go
out leave the house and I didn't know
what I was gonna do I didn't have no gun
I couldn't fight no more so I just gave
up what went through your mind when the
court pronounced you guilty I was trying
to portray a tough guy in court so when
they gave me the death sentence I
laughed at him and the prosecutor told
everybody that's the voice of evil which
I I would agree at the time yeah you
know I deserve the death penalty I was
young and didn't care about anybody at
all but myself
or anything and uh how deserve that I
deserve that sentence at the time and
yeah I just pretty much laughed at him
when they gave it to me but then you
know when I was by myself it really sunk
in like man you you're more likely gonna
be executed one day it just hit me hard
you know
so I put my face in my pillow and you
know I mean cried a little bit was it
inevitable that sooner or later you
would end up in a place like this
I always knew as a kid I'd probably end
up in prison
it's it's it's it's weird because when I
was a kid I was fascinated with prison
movies every time we drive by prison I
would wonder what are those guys doing
what's it like in there what are they up
to you know what I mean why should I
care I'm a kid why shouldn't I care but
I just cuz I just always knew I was
gonna end up in there because I just had
a problem with the rules with authority
and as you can see I'm here because of
that because you killed the police
officer you face execution if it does
come to that would you face that moment
with deep regret with remorse or with
defiance I would I would I would
definitely regret regret it and
definitely have remorse but I'd also
have a little defiance like why are you
killing me you said killings wrong but
yet you're premeditatedly strapping me
to this table and you're gonna poison me
to death you're gonna kill me and that's
what I would you know present
so these are the steps which an inmate
who's about to be executed would take
into this interest area correct next
time I talk to the man who could be next
in line to be executed when you sit here
now on death row and you reflect on what
you did what do you think
I deserve to be here
I meet Roscoe the cat
I expected a male as I put in for my pet
and then about a month later I realized
it wasn't a boy and a killer who never
knew his victims you were offered money
just to kill
listen
[Music]
[Laughter]
[Applause]
[Music]